Mathematical review and repair record — 2026-10-03
=================================================

Scope and provenance
--------------------
The pre-review worktree was committed as 0bb29e6, including its existing
deletions of tracked Lean build artifacts. The review reads the five original
Lean modules, all manuscript sections and appendices, the flattened manuscript,
the specification/claim inventory, all three numerical diagnostics, and the
relevant lens/counting definitions in Foundations of Emergence Calculus.
No manuscript source or file under paper/ is edited. This record supplies the
correct mathematical statements and proofs for the later editorial phase.
The inventory's historical acceptance labels are not fresh verification.
This is one reviewer's review, followed by a distinct adversarial self-review;
it is not an independent multi-reviewer certification.

Verdict
-------
The existing Lean declarations are correct for their represented statements.
The finite packaging, HF closure, HF model, non-attainment, finite rank-audit,
finite Cohen density/counting, rank translation, finite selection, and standard
arbitrary-set AC equivalence retain their mathematical strength.

The forcing section's numbered genericity theorem proves a valid implication.
Its title and prose overstate that implication as a characterization. Neither
novelty alone nor novelty plus every ground-coded infinite-block splitting
requirement characterizes Cohen genericity. This converse cannot be restored
with a better proof: there is a counterexample below. Ground coding is also
not the full fiber-predicate family of a lens on omega. Finally, the probability
one novelty statement is not probability one Cohen genericity.

The central free/purchased title and the valid forward forcing and strict
extension results can be retained. Both repairs are adopted:
retain the forward implication and strict predicate-algebra extension as the
main explanation, and supply the exact dense-set/closed-obstruction
characterization as supporting mathematics. Use a restricted ground-coded
Boolean algebra as the infinite expressive layer. The characterization
requires ALL ground-coded dense sets; it does not make non-groundness
sufficient. The material scope decision is resolved; the manuscript remains
unchanged for the separate editorial phase.

Exact forcing repairs
---------------------
F1. Under J1, let M be a countable transitive model of ZFC. Its countability
is EXTERNAL; M itself believes its set of reals is uncountable. For every
Cohen generic G over M, union(G) is total, outside M, and splits every infinite
M-coded subset of omega. The paper's proof via T_n, D_y, E_A establishes this
under J1 alone. J2 is used only to identify the resulting model M[G].
Use full ZFC for J1 unless the exact fragment and all required schemas for J2
have been specified; "a sufficiently large finite fragment" is not a precise
alternative hypothesis for all conclusions.

F2. Strong counterexample to the converse. Take a Cohen real r over M and set
x(2n)=x(2n+1)=r(n). If x belonged to M, the definable even-coordinate extraction
would put r in M, a contradiction. For infinite A in M, the set
B={floor(a/2): a in A} lies in M and is infinite: the inverse image of a finite
B has at most 2|B| elements. Since r splits B, x splits A. Thus x is outside M
and splits EVERY infinite ground-coded A.

Nevertheless the following ground-coded family is dense and open in Cohen
forcing:
  D*={p: some n has both 2n,2n+1 in dom(p), with unequal assigned bits}.
Given a finite p, choose a pair above its support and assign 0,1. Every
restriction of x misses D*. Hence x is not Cohen generic over M. This argument
uses J1 and Rasiowa–Sikorski for r, not J2. CohenBoundary.lean checks the actual
infinite density of D* and the fact that every duplicated-bit real misses it;
the CTM/generic-real existence and ground-model closure parts remain this
explicit mathematical proof, not a claimed mechanization.

F3. Why the ground-coded family is not a full partition lens. If the visible
predicates of f:omega->X include every singleton predicate, equal f-values at
m,n force the singleton of m to have equal values at m,n, so m=n. Then f is
injective, and EVERY Boolean predicate is constant on its fibers. A transitive
ZF model contains every singleton of omega but omits some external reals.
Therefore P(omega) intersect M cannot equal the full fiber-invariant family of
any f on omega. It is a Boolean algebra closed under the unions coded in M,
not an externally countably complete sigma-algebra: external arbitrary unions
of its singleton sets already give all external subsets of omega.
CohenBoundary.singleton_visibility_forces_injective and
singleton_visibility_forces_all formalize this obstruction.

F4. A precise replacement preserving strict extension. Let
B_M=P(omega) intersect M, using subsets or their Boolean characteristic
functions consistently. It contains 0,1 and is closed under finite Boolean
operations. For any x, let B_M[x] be the Boolean algebra generated by B_M and
x. Then B_M is contained in B_M[x], and containment is strict iff x is not in
B_M: in the forward direction x in B_M would make every generated expression
already lie in B_M; in the reverse direction x is a new element. For a Cohen
real, B_M[x] is contained in P(omega) intersect M[G], since finite Boolean
operations on ground parameters and x exist in that extension. Thus the
extension of the expressive algebra is genuinely strict on the SAME domain.
CohenBoundary.adjoining_strict_iff_novel checks the algebraic equivalence for
an explicit BooleanClosed input; it does not assume that input from a name.

F5. The original non-factorization theorem is correct as stated: two generics
deciding coordinate 0 differently have the same CONSTANT map G |-> M and
different real readouts. A function through a constant map would be constant.
This is a coarse, deliberately chosen projection; it does not establish that
all ground observations fail to distinguish generics. The Boolean-algebra
strict extension in F4 supplies the substantive expressive-content bridge.
Strict observational extension also must not be confused with inclusion of
complete first-order theories: M and M[G] may disagree on old-language
sentences such as CH, so Th(M) need not be contained in Th(M[G]).

F6. Category and probability. Cohen reals over fixed countable M form a
comeagre set: enumerate its dense sets and take the intersection of their
dense open cylinder unions. They have fair-coin measure ZERO, not one.
Here is a direct null cover coded in M. Enumerate all finite binary strings
(s_i) by a fixed arithmetic enumeration. For each k,i let t_{k,i} be s_i
padded with zeroes to length max(|s_i|,k+i+1). This prescription, including
its whole sequence for each k, is defined in M without a choice principle.
The open union
  U_k = union_i [t_{k,i}]
is dense and has measure at most sum_i 2^(-k-i-1)=2^(-k).
The conditions extending some t_{k,i} form an M-coded dense family, so every
Cohen real is in every U_k. Their intersection has measure zero. In contrast,
the complement of the externally countable ground reals has measure one;
splitting every infinite ground-coded A also has measure one, by countable
intersection. The finite 1-2^(-(N-K)) limit models DISAGREEMENT-MEETING novelty,
not the measure of full Cohen genericity. The diagnostic caption is corrected.

F7. The adopted supporting exact characterization. For a total real x,
G_x is Cohen generic over M iff x avoids every ground-CODED closed nowhere
dense subset of Cantor space (the code is interpreted externally; it does
not merely mean the old set of ground reals constituting its internal points).
Proof: for such a closed set F, conditions whose cylinders miss F form a
ground-coded dense family, so genericity supplies a cylinder containing x
and disjoint from F. Conversely, for any dense D in M the open cylinder union
U_D={x: some p in D is a restriction of x} is dense and ground-coded.
Its complement is closed nowhere dense. Avoiding that complement gives a
condition in G_x intersect D. Thus all dense sets are met. The singleton
ground-real obstructions and the block-constancy obstructions are only a
proper subfamily of these closed nowhere dense tests; D* supplies a missing
one. This strengthens the recognition vocabulary, not the false converse
"outside M implies generic", and prices its full family of tests explicitly.

Claim-by-claim reconstruction
----------------------------
D-ZF-01, decoration L1/L2/L3: correct for finite acyclic graphs. Height supplies
unique recursion, child decorations are HF, and membership lowers rank.
For extensionality/injectivity of decoration, induct simultaneously over two
nodes' heights: equal decorations match children, the inductive hypothesis
identifies matching nodes, and extensionality identifies the parents. Rootedness
then makes the decoration image exactly TC({profile}), giving the isomorphism.
One scope correction: each graph is finite, but the collection Z of all such
graphs is infinite (and needs an encoding convention if node names range over
an unrestricted universe). It is not a finite carrier in Foundations I's
A_FIN sense. Restrict presentations to finite initial-segment node labels or
use finite rooted trees; then Z is a countable set. Invoke finite-graph arguments
locally, not a finite-carrier theorem for the global Z. New HFSets uses the
actual inductive type of finite trees and never claims its whole type is finite.

T-ZF-00: f(C(a))=a by membership induction. Then E^2=E,
Fix(E)=im(E)=C[HF], the lens on Fix(E) is a bijection, and the retraction
equations follow. The original Packaging module proves the structural
idempotent pattern, NOT the graph construction or Mostowski collapse. Its
Fin3 collapse is an idempotent witness, not a graph-decoration theorem.
HFSets adds the extensional quotient of finite trees, with no representative
selection. It still does not mechanize the DAG-to-canonical-graph isomorphism.

T-ZF-01, closure/collection/finite powerset/HF satisfaction: correct. F is
monotone as well as extensive: any old transport h:a->A remains admissible
as a map into a larger family. Empty/pair/union closure derives collection.
Every HF set is a finite collection of lower-rank HF sets, giving induction.
Finite powersets are finite collections of finite gates. Relative Separation
uses the truth of the chosen formula in (HF,in), not ambient truth of an
unbounded formula. Relative Replacement collects its UNIQUE HF-valued outputs
over a finite domain; finite recursion needs no choice. Transitivity identifies
internal elements and subsets. Foundation is minimal rank. Infinity fails.
No assumption that arbitrary formulas are absolute is needed or valid.

Nearly-free strengthening: (HF,in) satisfies AC too. Any finite family of
nonempty HF sets has a finite choice graph; choosing least Ackermann code is
one explicit realization, and all its ordered pairs and the finite graph are
HF. Thus HF also witnesses dropping C-INF while retaining C-POW, C-REPL and
C-SEL interpreted INTERNALLY. This strengthens the non-redundancy witness.

The Ackermann remark needs a model/theory distinction. Standard HF and
standard natural-number arithmetic have the familiar inverse codings. For
theory-level bi-interpretability with PA, use ZF-minus-Infinity plus its
negation AND transitive containment, or the corresponding membership-induction
presentation. Bare finite ZF with the ordinary single Foundation axiom does
not supply that extra principle. HF itself satisfies transitive containment,
so this qualification does not weaken the proved HF model or rank recovery.
Primary reference: Kaye–Wong, sections 5–6, especially Proposition 14:
https://bpb-us-w2.wpmucdn.com/blog.nus.edu.sg/dist/4/10956/files/2019/01/finitesettheory-1i2tx5t.pdf

The closure lattice P(HF) is UNCOUNTABLE, though HF is countable. The original
closure lemma's phrase "countable lattice P(HF)" is false. Intersection of
closed supersets is legitimate in the declared ambient set-theoretic
metatheory, without a choice axiom. It is not a finite computation. Likewise
constructing the global HF model is infinitary metamathematics even though
every represented object and every local operation is finite. Do not read
"nothing infinitary appears" as a foundational derivation without Infinity.

New HFClosure proves extensionality iff matching members, constructor
congruence, derived collection equivalence, extensional-family closure
generating all HF presentations, and no inductive HF object. HFSets proves
these on the quotient: Extensionality, Empty, Pairing, Union, decidable
Separation, rank decrease and no inductive object. Its Bool gates are genuinely
decidable; it does NOT formalize full formula-schema satisfaction or arbitrary
Prop gates. A raw gate must respect Equiv; a raw transport must also respect
Equiv to descend. HFSets gates are supplied on the quotient so this condition
is proved automatically. No quotient representatives are chosen.

T-ZF-02: correct for the stated finitely generated rule class. If A is a family
of HF sets, all members of TC(a) are HF. A newly added finite set with such
members is HF. Induction proves every A_n subset HF; their omega-union also
is a family of HF sets, not a new element omega. No inductive element appears.
With limit stages defined as unions the same stability even holds through
transfinite iteration; this does not require adding such a claim to the paper.
Clause (2)'s conclusion follows from idempotence; calling the rule a "closure
operator" additionally requires monotonicity, which was not assumed for G.
Admitting an infinite element violates the explicit finite-output requirement.
This is an object-boundary theorem, not a proof that arbitrary finite syntax,
finite rules or sufficiently expressive formal theories cannot prove Infinity.

T-ZF-03: correct finite TFAE. Acyclicity bounds path length by |V|-1; longest
path yields a potential. Potentials exclude cycles and provide minimal
elements. A cycle's vertex set has no minimal element, giving the converse.
Empty graph and empty subsets pose no exceptions: nonemptiness is explicit.
The original RankAudit Lean checks potential => no cycle and list minima;
acyclic => potential and the full TFAE remain mathematical proofs, not exports.
General well-founded ranks are ordinal-valued, not necessarily Nat-valued.

T-ZF-04a, ordinal definability: valid in HF. Transitivity and membership
linearity, with well-foundedness, identify the finite von Neumann ordinals.
The maximal member argument must exclude membership cycles when establishing
that the maximal member is itself transitive; the rank audit supplies this.
Rank definability: quantify a finite transitive domain T containing x and
the finite graph f on T. Require for each y in T that f(y) is the union of
the successors of f(z) for z in y. Existence follows from rank recursion;
uniqueness is induction on rank. T can be TC({x}), defined as the least
transitive set CONTAINING x AS AN ELEMENT, not merely containing every member
of x. The graph and ordered-pair witnesses are HF. Empty y gives rank 0.
Translation: unnest stage terms locally at atoms, translate stage equality
as equality, order as membership, rank atoms by R, and relativize stage
quantifiers to Ord. Induction on formulas, including assignments, proves the
sentence result. The negation case needs local atomic unnesting, not pulling
fresh existential quantifiers outside arbitrary negations. This is lossless
for the canonical rank expansion, not arbitrary stage labelings.

T-ZF-06: valid finite section search and valid ZF equivalence of AC, sections,
prototype families and nonempty indexed products. Arbitrary finite sets need
an enumeration, but existence of an enumeration for one finite set requires
no AC. An enumeration of a finite SOURCE is important; a finite target alone
does not make arbitrary infinite fibers effectively searchable.
The particular membership-profile lens already has the explicitly defined
section C(a), even for the analogous infinite set presentations when admitted.
It does not need AC. C-SEL prices sections for ALL surjections of sets, not
this particular canonical membership packaging map. More generally any lens
with a well-ordered source admits a least-preimage section in ZF, even with
infinitely many fibers. "Canonical" here means supplied prototypes; AC gives
no natural or automorphism-invariant choice of prototypes.
The arbitrary-lens equivalence requires SET-sized sources, fibers and indices;
it must not silently be applied to arbitrary proper-class surjections.

C-INF/C-POW/C-REPL/C-SEL, T-ZF-04: valid only as an explicitly conditional
supplier ledger. The commitments are Infinity/Power/Replacement/Choice in
package terminology; they alone do not imply the free axioms in an arbitrary
undefined layer. The manuscript openly imports INFINITARY stagewise axiom
verification, including Separation. Finite gates do not prove infinite
Separation. A precise sufficient hypothesis, preserving the ZF conclusion:
  U is a transitive admitted universe with empty set, pairs of all admitted
  objects, unions of all admitted objects, and every relatively definable
  subset of every admitted object. Assume an admitted inductive set, an
  internal powerset of every admitted object, and every relatively definable
  functional image of an admitted set. Then (U,in) satisfies ZF.
Proof: transitivity gives Extensionality; the first closures give Empty,
Pairing, Union and each Separation instance; ambient rank well-foundedness
gives Foundation; the three latter hypotheses give Infinity, Power and each
Replacement instance. Add sections of every INTERNAL surjection to obtain
AC by the standard projection argument. Foundation here uses the declared
ambient well-founded metatheory, not a finite-graph theorem applied globally.
For a proper class U, relative truth is interpreted separately for each fixed
formula, not via an assumed set-valued uniform truth predicate.

Internal powerset means all y IN U that are subsets of x, with quantifiers
relativized to U. Requiring every AMBIENT subset is stronger and must be
separately declared. Infinity supplies some inductive I; identify the least
inductive subset as omega using Separation, rather than assuming every
inductive witness named "omega" is literally omega. The hierarchy recursion
and any limit-stage completion are imported infinitary structural content.
For truncated V_kappa, Replacement needs rank-bounded functional images;
an arbitrary cutoff is insufficient. No inaccessible cardinal existence,
transitive-model existence, or full ZFC consistency follows from this ledger.

Non-redundancy: the HF witness improves as above. In ambient ZFC,
V_(omega+omega) is transitive and satisfies Zermelo+Choice: finite rank
increments stay below its limit cutoff; subsets preserve bounds and internal
choice graphs have bounded finite additional rank. The image of the definable
map n |-> omega+n has rank omega+omega, hence is not an ELEMENT of this V;
its domain omega and graph values are internally available. Replacement fails.

The Power-set guard can be made concrete, rather than left as an unnamed
"hereditarily-smaller universe": in ambient ZFC let U=H_(omega_1), the
hereditarily countable sets. All internal reals are precisely ALL ambient
subsets of omega, since each is hereditarily countable. Any candidate powerset
in U would be countable and contain all these reals, contradicting Cantor.
U satisfies the other ZFC axioms, including Collection: for a countable domain
select one hereditary-countable witness per element externally using ambient
AC, and the countable union of their countable transitive closures is countable.
Separation, Pairing, Union, Foundation and Infinity are inherited by closure.
Replacement follows by taking unique witnesses; internally every admitted
set has a countable well-order, whose relation graph is again hereditary
countable, so internal AC and all internal sections hold. This uses ambient
ZFC and regularity of omega_1, and is not a ZF proof that arbitrary H_kappa
works. The Collection/Replacement distinction does not invalidate this witness.
Primary source: Gitman–Hamkins–Johnstone, introduction pp.1–3, explicitly
identifies H_kappa for uncountable regular kappa as models of the stronger
Collection version: https://victoriagitman.github.io/files/ZFC-.pdf
The no-choice guard remains the standard relative-consistency result for
pure ZF, not an untransferred permutation model with atoms.

T-ZF-05f meeting/density/counting: correct, including degenerate empty
N=K=0, provided K counts NONEMPTY fibers. D_g meeting is exactly h!=g.
E_x meeting is exactly splitting; its constant-total defect characterization
requires |B_x|>=2. Empty/singleton blocks have no possible split and E_x is
empty, so every condition fails density; do not omit the HasTwo guard.
The density proof's phrase "not extending g" must be "not a restriction
of g": every non-total restriction also fails to extend total g.
If the block has no assigned bits, choose two free bits and assign 0,1;
one free bit suffices only when a previously assigned bit exists.
There are exactly 2^K fiber predicates among 2^N total predicates.
The block-splitting formula can be strengthened for disjoint blocks to
  P(splits every non-singleton block)=product_(|B|>=2)(1-2^(1-|B|)),
by independence. The sum bound remains valid. Distinguish any strict
refinement from refinement on every block. At K=N no predicate strictly
refines, though splitting every non-singleton block is vacuous.
In the ACTUAL finite forcing poset every total condition is maximal, so
any dense subset must contain every total condition. Thus every total h
meets every genuinely dense family. D_g is not dense at g. Non-definability
is a statement about meeting the displayed DEFECTIVE families, not finite
forcing genericity. FiniteCohen.every_total_meets_dense and
disagreement_not_dense check this boundary directly.

T-ZF-05 infinite contrast: correct. Any finite condition has a free
coordinate on an infinite index; an infinite block has two free coordinates.
CohenBoundary uses actual bounded finite conditions on Nat, proves D_g and
infinite-block E_A dense, and the meeting iff a DISAGREEMENT WITNESS exists.
For infinite functions, deriving a witness just from function inequality is
a classical logical step. The new Lean lemma states the constructive witness
form so that no Classical.choice is imported via infinite excluded middle.

T-ZF-05, RS: correct under J1. Dense families in a countable M are externally
countable. With fixed enumerations of M and the countable poset, choose the
least extension at each step; this diagonal recursion uses no selection axiom.
Transitivity and M's correct omega identify its finite conditions with the
external poset, making the density facts absolute. Totality densities T_n and
the filter's compatibility identify G with the restrictions of union(G).
The forcing novelty theorem, nonfactor theorem and strict algebra extension
hold with F1–F5's precise readings. No converse genericity theorem holds.

T-ZF-05c CH: the cited relative-consistency statements are correct.
Con(ZF) yields Con(ZFC+CH) by constructibility and Con(ZFC+not CH) by the
classical forcing result. This does not produce a CTM from Con(ZF), nor
automatically put two models on a common literal carrier. To make the
same-ground host picture precise, separately assume a CTM of ZFC+GCH, and
compare it with its extension adding aleph_2^M many Cohen reals. ccc preserves
its cardinals, and distinct coordinates give at least aleph_2^M reals, so
CH becomes false. Ground and extension have the same ordinals, not the same
set domains. The single-real forcing theorem alone does not change CH.

CM-1: the given presentations witness that the membership lens is not
injective, but do not witness a failure of Extensionality in its quotient.
Aczel AFA retains Extensionality and still merges duplicated childless nodes;
its changed axiom is Foundation. A concrete alternative that actually separates
the proposed pair is f'(P)=(f(P),|V(P)|), or the raw pointed-graph isomorphism
type. Packaging can be the identity for this instrument. This choice supports
the intended no-forced-instrument conclusion without attributing a false
property to AFA or asserting Lawvere's theory retains graph multiplicities.
Primary corroboration of AFA/extensionality distinction:
https://users.math.cas.cz/~jerabek/papers/dghj.pdf (introduction on AFA and
bisimulation). The explicit f' counterexample itself needs no external import.
CM-2/3: valid cycles/no-potential and HF stability witnesses.
CM-4/5: valid with the relative/ambient scopes just specified.
CM-6: valid; adding an already fiber-definable g retains precisely the same
partition. It misses D_g by h=g. This is an observational, not syntactic,
strictness criterion.

Discussion/import scope: the incompleteness comparison must retain effective
axiomatization, consistency and enough arithmetic (with the usual provability
conditions for the second theorem). Arbitrary consistent expressive complete
theories, such as true arithmetic, need not be effectively axiomatized.
Statements about independent SENTENCES are not equivalent to missing real
PREDICATES; an imported incompleteness theorem provides no such equivalence.
These distinctions repair the discussion's mathematical assertions without
promoting its structural metaphor to a new theorem. Likewise the P6 audit
actually proved here is rank decrease along MEMBERSHIP; it is not a theorem
of rank monotonicity under every arbitrary coarse-graining lens.

Prop axioms, computations and reproducibility
--------------------------------------------
Fresh lake build succeeds on the pinned 4.28.0 toolchain with no external
Lean dependency. formal/AxiomAudit.lean checks every SetStone declaration,
including generated helpers, using Lean's transitive collectAxioms traversal,
and rejects anything outside {propext, Quot.sound}. This is stronger coverage
than the old hand-selected 29-theorem audit. Audit tools import Lean elaborator
code for inspection; it is not a proof dependency of the SetStone library.
No choice, sorryAx, or project axioms are allowed in the checked library.
The audit is now a default Lake target, so ordinary lake build enforces it.

Diagnostics: finite Cohen structurally enumerates all SURJECTIVE labeled
lenses for 1<=N<=5 plus the empty lens; it is not a test of all nonsurjective
codomain presentations. The D/E checks are exhaustive within this scope.
The new exact-count checks test 2^K and the independent block-splitting count.
HF slices are rank<=n = V_(n+1), NOT V_n: V_0 is empty, V_1 has size 1.
Metadata now gives both rank bound and cumulative stage. C1 used to test
uniqueness of already unique Python frozensets; it now cross-checks every
element against independent Ackermann bit coding and decoding. C2/C3/C4/C5
are sampled. C6 checks every membership edge and C7 every inductive candidate
in the rank<=4 universe (65,536 elements). New C8 tests powersets for all
16 rank<=3 source sets, and C9 exhausts every map from those domains to the
four rank<=2 target sets. These are bounded exhibits, not HF schema proofs.
The scaling experiment previously only gated monotonicity of its predicted
curve; it now checks empirical binomial residuals. The rarity companion now
checks the empirical all-block splitting count against the exact product.
Rare cases explicitly marked observational_low_expected are observations,
not statistical falsification gates; all_passed does not prove a theorem.
Pinned numpy/matplotlib dependencies are recorded for reproducible reruns.

Remaining editorial work (deferred to the editorial phase)
---------------------------------------------------------
Apply F1–F6 to the abstract, introduction, forcing headings/prose, diagnostic
interpretation and discussion; specify the global presentation encoding and
local A_FIN scope; correct P(HF)'s cardinality and V-stage indexing; separate
canonical membership packaging from arbitrary AC-costed lifts; give the precise
infinitary structural premises and internal/ambient quantifiers; name the
H_(omega_1) powerset witness; replace CM-1's incorrect AFA attribution; make
the CH host comparison explicit. These are documented mathematical repairs,
not changes to the manuscript during this phase.

First review checkpoint verification receipt (da649f1)
----------------------------------------------------
Commands executed successfully in this review:
  cd formal && lake clean && lake build && lake env lean AxiomAudit.lean
  [after making AxiomAudit a default target] cd formal && lake build
  python diagnostics/finite_cohen.py        (pinned diagnostics/requirements.txt)
  python diagnostics/definability_rarity.py
  python diagnostics/hf_slice.py
That checkpoint's audit checks 332 project declarations, of which 166 are theorems
(including generated declarations). Only propext and Quot.sound occur.
Negative controls independently injected a project axiom, sorryAx and
Classical.choice into temporary audit files; each was rejected for the
expected forbidden axiom. No such control is present in project sources.
Diagnostic controls force wrong scaling and rarity frequencies, a missing
powerset, and correlated blocks whose definability marginal is EXACTLY right
but all-block splitting frequency is wrong; each actual gate rejects them.

Finite Cohen: 634 lenses, including one empty lens; 634 exact counting checks;
all structural and applicable statistical gates pass. HF: 65,536 round trips,
524,288 membership edges, 65,536 non-inductivity tests, 16 powersets and 625
maps, plus the declared closure samples, all pass. Rarity: all nine configs
pass their applicable gates; the maximum absolute all-block-splitting z-score
is about 2.302. Low-expectation observations retain their explicit status.
git diff --check passes. git diff --name-only -- paper/ [flattened manuscript]
is empty. Mathematical review notes, Lean code and diagnostic artifacts are
the deliverables; manuscript reconciliation is deferred to the editorial phase.

Continuation: mechanized exact recognition option
-------------------------------------------------
This continuation starts from the clean da649f1 worktree, which committed
the repaired code and mathematical evidence. With the forcing scope decision
still open, work continued by implementing formal/SetStone/CohenRecognition.lean and exporting it from
the normal SetStone library.

The new module derives the closed-code recognition bridge rather than
assuming it in a populated record. For an actual family D of finite
conditions define
  OpenCover(D,p) iff some q restricted by p belongs to D,
  Obstruction(D,p) iff not OpenCover(D,p).
The obstruction code is downward closed. Every dense D gives, above any
finite assignment, an extension whose whole cylinder misses all branches of
Obstruction(D). The definition of branches over all finite restrictions is
proved equivalent to the usual condition on every finite initial prefix.
Hence these are closed nowhere dense obstructions in Cantor space, not
arbitrary types relabeled as closed sets.

Constructively, Branch(Obstruction(D),h) iff h does not meet D. With the
explicit classical dichotomy "h meets D or h does not meet D", its negation
is equivalent to meeting D. The per-family theorem quantifies that dichotomy
over all the supplied indices. This is classical LOGIC as a visible premise,
not an implicit choice axiom or a computational decision procedure for
ground-coded dense-set membership. The genericity interpretation additionally
requires the supplied family to cover ALL ground-model dense sets; the Lean
module does not prove ground-model membership, enumeration or that coverage.
For each actually dense family the nowhere-density proof is separately
derived from its density hypothesis. The equivalence itself also holds for
nondense requirement families; this does not make them genericity tests.

The module also proves that every duplicated-bit real lies in the actual
closed nowhere dense obstruction for PairMismatch. Thus the stronger option
detects the precise counterexample to novelty-only recognition. It cannot
restore the false equivalence with non-groundness or splitting alone.

Adversarial self-review checked: extension direction, interpretation of bound
representations of finite assignments, arbitrary finite restrictions versus
initial prefixes, logical double negation in the converse, exact requirement
family quantifiers, and whether the counterexample exercises this same
recognition mechanism. No independent reviewer was involved at this stage.

Fresh default lake build succeeds and audits 356 project declarations,
including 183 theorems, allowing only propext and Quot.sound. No diagnostic
source changed in this continuation; its earlier computations retain the same
scope and artifacts. git diff --check passes, and no paper source is changed.
At this checkpoint the substantive direction choice remained pending; both the forward implication
with strict predicate-algebra extension and the stronger dense-set recognition
option now have explicit mathematical support and Lean cores.

Adopted theorem scope
---------------------
Both routes are adopted, and the open scope decision is resolved. The simpler
forward novelty/strict-extension result is the primary explanation. The exact
recognition characterization is additional supporting mathematics, with the
complete recognition family visible. Neither route retains the false converse
from mere novelty, and neither turns the finite probability limit into a
measure-one assertion about Cohen generics.

CohenRecognition.GenericRelative now specifies meeting every dense condition
family in an explicit coded register. generic_iff_meets_complete_family proves
that an indexed list can replace this full register only when its entries
are coded and dense AND every coded dense family occurs in that list.
The code-membership and completeness bridges for an actual M remain external
inputs, justified mathematically under J1 by M's definability closures and
external enumeration. They are not inferred from a small sampled test family.

generic_implies_novel derives novelty when each disagreement family for a
ground predicate is coded. generic_implies_strict_extension then derives
strictness of its adjoined predicate algebra from proved novelty and the
explicit Boolean closure hypothesis. forcing_repair_both assembles:
  (a) derived nowhere-density of all the associated obstruction codes;
  (b) genericity relative to the complete coded register iff avoidance of
      every associated obstruction, under the visible classical dichotomies;
  (c) genericity implies strict predicate-algebra extension.
These are mathematical compositions of proved lemmas with separately listed
inputs, not declarations that assume novelty or strictness as their premises.
registered_pairMismatch_excludes_duplicate verifies that the complete-register
interpretation actually rejects the duplicated-bit counterexample as soon as
the true ground-coded PairMismatch family is registered.

The library still does not mechanize construction or existence of a CTM,
M[G], imported infinitary set theory, or full formula-schema satisfaction.
Their conditional and mathematical scopes remain exactly as recorded above.
All earlier corrections and explicit grade boundaries remain in force. No
manuscript edit was made at this stage.

Final completion audit and verification receipt
----------------------------------------------
The pre-review repository state was committed as 0bb29e6 before mathematical
changes. The original mathematics, exported Lean statements and diagnostic
interpretations have been reviewed, with defects, counterexamples and repairs
recorded in this file. Valid finite claims were retained and strengthened
where the proofs supported it. Both repaired routes for the material forcing
correction were adopted; no direction choice remains pending. The resulting forward theorem and complete-register characterization
are exported together as forcing_repair_both.

The final ordinary `cd formal && lake build` succeeds (13 jobs). Its default
axiom audit checks all 362 project declarations, including 188 theorems and
generated helpers. Only propext and Quot.sound are permitted; no unfinished
proof, project axiom or Classical.choice is accepted. Adversarial self-review
of the final composition checked the two-way coverage requirements, coded
disagreement families, Boolean closure, explicit classical logic, genuinely
derived novelty/strictness, and registered PairMismatch counterexample.

No diagnostic source changed after the successful computations and negative
controls recorded at the first checkpoint, so those bounded validation
results retain their stated scope. `git diff --check` passes. Comparing the
paper directory and flattened manuscript against 0bb29e6 produces no changes.
The mathematical and Lean review phase is complete. The documented manuscript
corrections belong to the later editorial phase; this completion does not assert that the unchanged prose is corrected.

Addendum (editorial phase, 2026-10-03): axiom-audit coverage
-------------------------------------------------------------
The namespace filter used above (`SetStone` name prefix) omitted nine private
compiler-generated declarations in HFClosure, so "every SetStone declaration"
overstated its coverage; the 362/188 counts describe the namespace-filtered
subset. formal/AxiomAudit.lean now selects declarations by defining module.
The default `lake build` audits 371 declarations (194 theorems, 9 private),
again allowing only propext and Quot.sound. Negative controls injecting a
project axiom, sorryAx and Classical.choice were re-run against the same check
and each was rejected. No mathematical statement changes.
